
protoc-gen-yara
===============

`protoc-gen-yara` is a plugin for `protoc`, the [Google Protocol Buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers) compiler. It takes a protocol buffer description file (.proto) and automatically generates the source code for a YARA module that accepts data encoded in the format defined by the procol buffer. By using the generated module you can create YARA rules that rely on your custom-defined data structures.

For example, let's suppose that you have the following protocol buffer definition:

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

package acme.payments;

import "yara.proto";

option (yara.module_options) = {
  name : "pb_customer"
  root_message: "acme.payments.Customer";
};

message Customer {
  string name = 1;
  int32 age = 2;
  repeated CreditCard credit_cards = 3;
}

message CreditCard {
  string number = 1;
  message Expiration {
    int32 year = 1;
    int32 month = 2;
  }
  Expiration expiration = 2;
  enum Status {
    VALID = 0;
    CANCELLED = 1;
  }
  Status status = 3;
}
```


From the above protobuf definition you can generate a YARA module `pb_customer` that will receive data encoded as the `Customer` message and use it for creating rules like the following ones:

```
import "pb_customer"

rule customer_under_25 {
  condition:
    pb_customer.age < 25
}
```


Notice that the protobuf definition includes the following snippet:

```protobuf
import "yara.proto";

option (yara.module_options) = {
  name : "pb_customer"
  root_message: "acme.payments.Customer";
};
```


This is required for `protoc-gen-yara` to be able to generate the YARA module. The `yara.proto` file contains the definitions for the module's options, like `name` and `root_message`, so it must be imported in your proto. The `name` option contains the module's name (the one that you will later use in `import` statements in your YARA rules), while `root_message` is the fully-qualified name of a message defining the top-level structure for the module. You can have multiple message definitions in your proto file, but only one can be the root message. In the example above, as the root message is `Customer` and the module is named `pb_customer`, in your YARA rules you can access fields `name` and `age` as `pb_customer.name` and `pb_customer.age` respectively.


### Installing protoc-gen-yara

```shell
git clone https://github.com/VirusTotal/protoc-gen-yara
cd protoc-gen-yara/
go install .
```


### Generating a YARA module

In order to generate the YARA module for your protocol buffer you must have `protoc` installed. You can download a [precompiled binary](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases) from its GitHub page or use a package for your platform. Ubuntu has the `protobuf-compiler` package and in Mac OS X you can use a [brew formula](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/protobuf). You will also need [protobuf-c](https://github.com/protobuf-c/protobuf-c), a pure C protocol buffer runtime and code generator, which also has its own package and [brew formula](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/protobuf-c).

##### Ubuntu

```bash
apt install protobuf-compiler protobuf-c-compiler libprotobuf-c-dev
```

##### Mac OS X

```bash
brew install protobuf protobuf-c
```

After installing `protoc-gen-yara` and its pre-requisites you should have `protoc`, `protoc-gen-c` and `proto-c-yara` in your path.

Now, from the `protocol-gen-yara` directory use the following command for generating a YARA module based in `example.proto`:


```bash
protoc --c_out=. --yara_out=. example/example.proto -I. -I./pb
```

This command will generate the following files:

- example.c. (the YARA module's source code, generated by `protoc-gen-yara` )
- example.pb-c.h (header file for example.pb-c.c, generated by `protoc-gen-c`)
- example.pb-c.c (pure C encoder/decoder for protobufs defined in example.proto, generated by `protoc-gen-c`)
- yara.pb-c.h (dummy header file expected by example.pb-c.h, generated by `protoc-gen-yara`)

### Caveats

Due to YARA limitations not all protocol buffers can generate a YARA module. The currently existing limitations are:

- Unsigned integers are not supported, your protocol buffer can not use types `uint32` ,`uint64`, `fixed32` and `fixed64`.
- Maps are supported as long as the key is a string, no other key types are supported.
- Can not declare recursive structures. In Protocol Buffers you can define a message `Foo` that has a field of type `Foo`, this is not possible in YARA modules.

### Ignoring fields

In some cases you may want `protocol-gen-yara` to ignore certain fields defined in your Protocol Buffer messages and not include them in the generated YARA module. This happens for example when the message defines some field of an unsupported type, and the simplest solution is simply excluding them from the module. This can be done by using the `ignore` custom option, like shown below.

```proto
message Customer {
  string name = 1;
  int32 age = 2;
  fixed32 unwanted = 3 [(yara.field_options).ignore = true];
}

```
